Forking in GitHub
=================

**Forking** is a technique in GitHub that allows you to take someone
else’s repository, copy it to your account, and make your own changes to
this copy. After pushing commits to the forked (copied) repository, you
can also suggest the original repository make these changes using a
**pull request**.

A pull request is mechanism for the owner of a repository to review
suggested changes before implementing them into their repository. The
owner can also give feeback to the pull request and request changes.

Forking repositories is great for playing around with coding projets
that other people have put together. It also a great tool for
collaborating. Each collaborator can fork a central repository, make
changes, and create pull request to the main repo.

How to Fork
-----------

Go to any account on GitHub (not your own) and pick a repository. Look
in the top right where it says “Fork” and click the button.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/fork.png
   :alt: Fork button

This will take you to a page for initializing the forked repository.
Most often, you will keep the fork with the same name as the original
repository.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/new_fork.png
   :alt: New fork

When you go to your forked repo, it will look slightly different from a
normal repository. Underneath the repo name, GitHub tells you where the
repo was forked from.

A little lower, a new bar is here. When you first fork, it will tell you
that you are up to date with the original repository. This will likely
change, both as you make commits, and as commits are made to the
original repository.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/forked-repo.png
   :alt: forked repo

If you have changes to suggest to original repository, you can click
“Contribute” and create a pull request, which we will cover below.

If there have been commits made to the original repo, you can retrieve
them by clicking “Sync fork”.

Adding an a remote upstream repository
--------------------------------------

We can also add the original repository to our local repository on our
machine to update when there are changes to the original. We can specify
**remote repositories** in git to check in on them.

We can take a look at the current remote repositories connected to our
repo.

.. tab:: Bash

   .. code:: bash

      $ git remote -v

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      origin  https://github.com/fordfishman/assignment-1-main.git (fetch)
      origin  https://github.com/fordfishman/assignment-1-main.git (push)

``origin`` is the default name for the repository we have cloned
directly from GitHub. It is the forked repo. We can also add the
original repo as an **upstream** repository.

.. tab:: Bash

   .. code:: bash

      git remote add upstream https://github.com/ENVS110a-SP23/assignment-1-main.git

To get changes from the original repo we’ve called ``upstream``, we can
use ``git fetch`` and ``git merge``, specifying ``upstream``.

.. tab:: Bash

   .. code:: bash

      git fetch upstream
      git merge upstream/main

Creating a pull request
-----------------------

Once we make a commit to our forked repository, we can make a **pull
request** to ask the owners of the original repo to review the changes.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/pull-req-button.png
   :alt: pull request button

This will open up a form for you to give a name to the pull request and
describe it. There are also options to add specific people to review the
changes, if you would like.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/pull-request-form.png
   :alt: pull request form

Merging a pull request
----------------------

You may also be interested in merged the changes from a pull request
into the main repository yourself.

You can see pending pull requests in the navigation of your repository.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/pull-request-tab.png
   :alt: pull request tab

You can open up the pending pull request here. Here, you can look at the
commits made in detail, deciding if you want to add them or not. You can
provide feedback and close the pull request, if you will not be adding
in the changes.

Importantly, GitHub will check to make sure the changes can be
implemented without causing any conflicts.

.. figure:: /_static/images/git/forking/merg-pull-req-button.png
   :alt: merge pull request form
