Writing functions
=================

Materials
---------

-  `Code-along Jupyter notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/DeisData/python/blob/master/sequential/functions-codealong.ipynb>`__
-  `Filled-in Jupyter notebook <https://colab.research.google.com/github/DeisData/python/blob/master/sequential/functions.ipynb>`__ 

As humans, we can only keep a few items in our own working memory at a
time. Trying to comprehend a Python script with hundreds of lines of
code can be quite daunting.

Thankfully, we can make this easier by breaking programs down into
**functions** to make them easier to understand. We have used built-in
functions, like ``print()`` in the past, but we can also write our own
custom functions.

Custom functions help us understand larger/more complicated ideas by
encapsulating separate parts of our program, allowing us to view each as
a single “thing”. Importantly, it also lets us re-use pieces of code
without having to duplicate dozens of lines of code over and over again.

Objectives
----------

- Define a function using ``def`` with a name, parameters, and a block of code.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      # Import libraries
      import numpy as np
      import pandas as pd 
      import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Function syntax
---------------

We can define a custom function using the keyword ``def`` (short for
“define”), followed by the desired function name, parentheses, and a
colon.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def print_greeting():
         print('Hello!')

Defining a function does not run the code within it. You need to
**call** the function to run it.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      print_greeting()

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      Hello!

We can also add **parameters** to functions. Python matches the
**arguments** in the call to the parameters in the function definition.

In the function call, we specify the values for ``year``, ``month``, and
``day`` in same order in function definition.

Within the function, these parameters act like variables we have used
before. However, they are only active within the **scope** of the
function.

**Parameters** refer to what we specify in the function definition, and
**arguments** are their values in the function call. However, if you mix
them up, people will still know what you’re talking about!

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def print_date(year, month, day):
         joined = str(year) + '/' + str(month) + '/' + str(day)
         print(joined)

      print_date(1871, 3, 19)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      1871/3/19

Or, we can name the arguments when we call the function, which allows us
to specify them in any order:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      print_date(month=3, day=19, year=1871)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      1871/3/19

Functions may return a result (a value) to their caller using
``return``. Here we define a function called ``average()`` that takes a
list and returns the mean.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def average(values):
         s = sum(values) # sum
         n = len(values) # number of vals
         return s/n

      a = average([1, 3, 4])
      print('average:', a)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      average: 2.6666666666666665

We need to be careful defining functions. If this function is called on
an empty list, for instance, we will get an error.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      average([])

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

      ZeroDivisionError                         Traceback (most recent call last)
      average([])
         s = sum(values) # sum
         n = len(values) # number of vals
         ----> return s/n

      ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

We can design functions in ways to avoid these errors by adding in
conditionals.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def better_average(values):
         average = None
         
         if len(values) > 0: # list isnt empty
            s = sum(values) # sum
            n = len(values) # number of vals 
            average = s/n
         
         return average

      print(better_average([]))

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      None

``None`` is a special keyword in Python with no value. It is not
equivalent to ``0`` or ``False``.

Every function returns something. A function that doesn’t explicitly
return a value automatically returns ``None``.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      result = print_date(1871, 3, 19)
      print('result of call is:', result)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      1871/3/19
      result of call is: None

Question 1: Function syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What is the error in the code below?

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def another_function
         print("Syntax errors are annoying.")
         print("But at least python tells us about them!")
         print("So they are usually not too hard to fix.")

.. collapse:: Solution

   .. container::

      The function definition is missing the correction punctuation (``()``
      and ``:``):

      .. tab:: Python

         .. code:: python

            def another_function():
               ...


Question 2: Calling functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What does this code return?

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def report(pressure):
         print('pressure is', pressure)

      print('calling', report, 22.5)


.. collapse:: Solution

   .. container::

      Because we don’t actually call the ``report()`` function, the
      ``print()`` statement in ``report()`` is not called. Printing
      ``report`` without the paretheses just returns information about the
      function, often called its **representation**. This includes its type
      (``function``), name (``report``), and its location in memory
      (e.g. ``0x7fb43777e5e0``).

      .. tab:: Output

         .. code:: none

            calling <function report at 0x7fb43777e5e0> 22.5

Default values
--------------

For the parameters we have defined, we can also provide default values.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def happy_birthday(name='Fred'):
         print('Happy Birthday,', name)

      happy_birthday('Sarah')
      happy_birthday()

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      Happy Birthday, Sarah
      Happy Birthday, Fred

When defining a function, we can use a combination of parameters with
and without default values. However, parameters with default values must
go **after** those without them.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def quadratic_equation(a, b, c, negative=False):
         sqr_rt = (b**2 - 4*a*c)**(1/2)
         
         if negative:
            x = (-b - sqr_rt) / (2*a)
         
         else:
            x = (-b + sqr_rt) / (2*a)
         
         return x

      quadratic_equation(1, 7, 10)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      -2.0

Question 3: Calling functions before defining
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Does order of operations matter for defining and calling functions?

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      fahr_to_celsius(32)

      def fahr_to_celsius(temp):
         return ((temp - 32) * (5/9)) 


.. collapse:: Solution

   .. container::

      It does matter! Because the function is called before it is defined,
      we will get an error here. Functions must be defined before they are
      called:

      .. tab:: Python
      
         .. code:: python

            def fahr_to_celsius(temp):
               return ((temp - 32) * (5/9))

            print('freezing point of water:', fahr_to_celsius(32), 'C')
            print('boiling point of water:', fahr_to_celsius(212), 'C')

      .. tab:: Output
         
         .. code:: none

            freezing point of water: 0.0 C
            boiling point of water: 100.0 C


Composing Functions
-------------------

Now that we’ve seen how to turn Fahrenheit into Celsius, we can also
write the function to turn Celsius into Kelvin:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def celsius_to_kelvin(temp_c):
         return temp_c + 273.15

      print('freezing point of water in Kelvin:', celsius_to_kelvin(0.))

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      freezing point of water in Kelvin: 273.15

What about converting Fahrenheit to Kelvin? We could write out the
formula, but we don’t need to. Instead, we can compose the two functions
we have already created:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def fahr_to_kelvin(temp_f):
         temp_c = fahr_to_celsius(temp_f)
         temp_k = celsius_to_kelvin(temp_c)
         return temp_k

      print('boiling point of water in Kelvin:', fahr_to_kelvin(212.0))

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      boiling point of water in Kelvin: 373.15

This is our first taste of how larger programs are built: we define
basic operations, then combine them in ever-larger chunks to get the
effect we want. Real-life functions will usually be larger than the ones
shown here — typically half a dozen to a few dozen lines — but they
shouldn’t ever be much longer than that, or the next person who reads it
won’t be able to understand what’s going on.

Functions for tidying up code
-----------------------------

Functions are very useful for consolidating code for repurposing it.

Below we have an example of calculating the distance between two points
without a function.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      point1 = [1, 4]
      point2 = [4,-2]

      distance = ((point1[0] - point2[0]) ** 2 + (point1[1] - point2[1]) ** 2) ** 0.5
      print(distance)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      6.708203932499369

With this setup, if we want to calculate distance on any more points,
we’ll have to repeat the code several times. This is known as code
duplication, and can cause issues if there are any typos in the original
code or if you want to make a change to code. In these cases, you will
need to change every instance you’ve run it.

When you copy and paste to duplicate, you may also forget to update
information.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      point3 = [5, 11]
      point4 = [2, 8]

      distance1 = ((point3[0] - point4[0]) ** 2 + (point3[1] - point4[1]) ** 2) ** 0.5
      print(distance1) 

      point5 = [5, 11]
      point6 = [2, 8]

      # easy to forget to change variable names!
      distance1 = ((point3[0] - point4[0]) ** 2 + (point3[1] - point4[1]) ** 2) ** 0.5 
      print(distance1) 

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      4.242640687119285
      4.242640687119285

We can remove this by defining a function for calculating distance and
simply running the function several times.

Limiting code duplication has an important benefit: if you need to
change a feature of the code, you will only need to change it one place.

Additionally, this helps clean up the code. We’ve given the function an
informative name, and you can easily check to see what the function
does.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      # Define a function to calculate the distance between two points
      def calculate_distance(x1, x2):
         d = ((x1[0] - x2[0]) ** 2 + (x1[1] - x2[1]) ** 2) ** 0.5
         return d

      # Calculate the distance between the points using the function
      print(calculate_distance(point1, point2))
      print(calculate_distance(point3, point4))
      print(calculate_distance(point5, point6))

      # Print the result
      print("Distance:", distance)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      6.708203932499369
      4.242640687119285
      4.242640687119285
      Distance: 6.708203932499369

Now that we know how to wrap bits of code up in functions, we can make
our inflammation analysis easier to read and easier to reuse. First,
let’s make a visualize function that generates our plots:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def visualize(filename):

         data = pd.read_csv(filename,header=None) # read in file

         fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 3, figsize=(10.0, 3.0)) # make blank plot

         ax[0].plot(data.mean())
         ax[0].set_ylabel('average')

         ax[1].plot(data.max())
         ax[1].set_ylabel('max')

         ax[2].plot(data.min())
         ax[2].set_ylabel('min')

         fig.tight_layout()
         plt.show()

Rather than jumbling this code together in one giant for loop, we can
now read and reuse with a simple for loop:

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      partial_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DeisData/python/master/data/inflammation-0" # the part of the link all of the csv's share

      filenames = [ partial_url + str(i) + ".csv" for i in range(1,4) ] # generates .../inflammation-01.csv through .../inflammation-04.csv

      for filename in filenames:
         print(filename)
         visualize(filename)

.. tab:: Output
   :new-set:

   ``https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DeisData/python/master/data/inflammation-01.csv``

   .. raw:: html  

      <div style="background-color: white;">

   |fig 39_1|    

   .. raw:: html

      </div>

   ``https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DeisData/python/master/data/inflammation-02.csv``

   .. raw:: html  

      <div style="background-color: white;">

   |fig 39_3|     

   .. raw:: html

      </div>

   ``https://raw.githubusercontent.com/DeisData/python/master/data/inflammation-03.csv``


   .. raw:: html  

      <div style="background-color: white;">

   |fig 39_5|    

   .. raw:: html

      </div>

Limiting code duplication has an important benefit: if you need to
change a feature of the code, you will only need to change it one place.

Question 4: Code duplication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The code below takes 4 short DNA sequences and calculates the percentage
of DNA bases that are either G or C for each of them. This runs the same
process for each sequence.

Take the code below and reduce some of the code duplication by creating
one or more functions, or with other approaches.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      # initialize sequences
      dna_sequence1 = 'CGACCAATAGTGATCCACGGATTCTCTGAAGAGTCAGCATGCGGGAAATATACGCACAACTAACGGGACGGCGATTAACGCCAAGCCTGGGCTGAATATT'
      dna_sequence2 = 'TGCGGCAGGATTTCGGACCGAACCTTGTCACCCTTACATTCATGCATAGCAGGTTGCGTTGCGTGGCAGCGTGCCCACCACCTCCCGCTGGTTGCCCGTA'
      dna_sequence3 = 'AAAGTTGTGGTACTAATCGTATTGTTGCATTGACCCATAAAGATCCTCATTTTACAGAGCACATGAGATCCCGTTGGTATCAACGCCTGATTCTTATAGG'
      dna_sequence4 = 'GAGCGAGAGCTTACTGTGTGCTATCCCTCAAGATGCGTTGAAAAGTCAACTCACCAGATACTTAGGCCTGACGAGACATCGATTGCCGGTTCGAAAAGTG'

      # sequence 1
      As1 = 0
      Ts1 = 0
      Gs1 = 0
      Cs1 = 0

      for base in dna_sequence1:
         
         if base == 'G':
            Gs1 += 1
         elif base == 'T':
            Ts1 += 1
         elif base == 'A':
            As1 += 1
         elif base == 'C':
            Cs1 += 1
         
      print("GC%:", (Gs1+Cs1)/(Gs1+Cs1+Ts1+As1))

      # sequence 2
      As2 = 0
      Ts2 = 0
      Gs2 = 0
      Cs2 = 0

      for base in dna_sequence2:
         
         if base == 'G':
            Gs2 += 1
         elif base == 'T':
            Ts2 += 1
         elif base == 'A':
            As2 += 1
         elif base == 'C':
            Cs2 += 1
         
      print("GC%:", (Gs2+Cs2)/(Gs2+Cs2+Ts2+As2))


      # sequence 3
      As3 = 0
      Ts3 = 0
      Gs3 = 0
      Cs3 = 0

      for base in dna_sequence3:
         
         if base == 'G':
            Gs3 += 1
         elif base == 'T':
            Ts3 += 1
         elif base == 'A':
            As3 += 1
         elif base == 'C':
            Cs3 += 1
         
      print("GC%:", (Gs3+Cs3)/(Gs3+Cs3+Ts3+As3))

      # sequence 4
      As4 = 0
      Ts4 = 0
      Gs4 = 0
      Cs4 = 0

      for base in dna_sequence4:
         
         if base == 'G':
            Gs4 += 1
         elif base == 'T':
            Ts4 += 1
         elif base == 'A':
            As4 += 1
         elif base == 'C':
            Cs4 += 1
         
      print("GC%:", (Gs4+Cs4)/(Gs4+Cs4+Ts4+As4))

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      GC%: 0.5
      GC%: 0.6
      GC%: 0.4
      GC%: 0.49

.. collapse:: Solution

   .. container::

      There are many ways to clean up this code. Here is one example.

      .. tab:: Python

         .. code:: python

            # initialize sequences
            dna_sequence1 = 'CGACCAATAGTGATCCACGGATTCTCTGAAGAGTCAGCATGCGGGAAATATACGCACAACTAACGGGACGGCGATTAACGCCAAGCCTGGGCTGAATATT'
            dna_sequence2 = 'TGCGGCAGGATTTCGGACCGAACCTTGTCACCCTTACATTCATGCATAGCAGGTTGCGTTGCGTGGCAGCGTGCCCACCACCTCCCGCTGGTTGCCCGTA'
            dna_sequence3 = 'AAAGTTGTGGTACTAATCGTATTGTTGCATTGACCCATAAAGATCCTCATTTTACAGAGCACATGAGATCCCGTTGGTATCAACGCCTGATTCTTATAGG'
            dna_sequence4 = 'GAGCGAGAGCTTACTGTGTGCTATCCCTCAAGATGCGTTGAAAAGTCAACTCACCAGATACTTAGGCCTGACGAGACATCGATTGCCGGTTCGAAAAGTG'

            def gc_analysis(sequence):
               # make bases into a dictionary
               bases = {
                  'A': 0,
                  'T': 0,
                  'G': 0,
                  'C': 0
               }

               for base in sequence: 
                  
                  bases[base] += 1 # use keys to remove conditional
               
               # make calculation have less clutter
               GCs = bases['G']+bases['C']
               total_bases = len(sequence)
               
               print("GC%:", GCs/total_bases)

            # create an iterable to use for loop
            dna_sequences = [dna_sequence1, dna_sequence2, dna_sequence3, dna_sequence4]

            for sequence in dna_sequences:
               gc_analysis(sequence)

      .. tab:: Output
   
         .. code:: none

            GC%: 0.5
            GC%: 0.6
            GC%: 0.4
            GC%: 0.49

Add documentation to your functions
-----------------------------------

If the first thing in a function is a string that isn’t assigned to a
variable, that string is attached to the function as its documentation.
This is called a *docstring* and is in triple quotes.

It can be helpful to describe each argument, including the intended data
type.

*Note: You can also use triple quotes elsewhere in code as generic
multi-line comments.*

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def offset_mean(data, target_mean_value):
         """
         Return a new array containing the original data
         with its mean offset to match the desired value.
         ------------------------------------------------
         data (numpy.array) - n x m dimensional array
         target_mean_value (float) - desired mean value
         """
         return (data - np.mean(data)) + target_mean_value

.. tab:: Python
   :new-set:

   .. code:: python

      help(offset_mean)

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      Help on function offset_mean in module __main__:

      offset_mean(data, target_mean_value)
         Return a new array containing the original data
         with its mean offset to match the desired value.
         ------------------------------------------------
         data (numpy.array) - n x m dimensional array
         target_mean_value (float) - desired mean value

We can label each parameter with the desired data type, as well. Note
that this will not enforce each data type, so you will need to build in
checks to actually limit the data types of arguments.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def my_func(x:int):
         print(x)

      my_func('Not a number')

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      Not a number

We can use conditionals to do these sorts of checks. If you don’t mind
having errors thrown, you can use an ``assert`` statement, which allows
you to make a quick boolean expression check with custom error message.
The general format is ``assert BOOLEAN_EXPRESSION, ERROR_MESSAGE``.

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def better_func(x:int):
         assert isinstance(x, int), x + " is not int"
         print(x)

      better_func('Not a number')

.. tab:: Output

   .. code:: none

      ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

      AssertionError                            Traceback (most recent call last)

      AssertionError: Not a number is not int

Question 5: Readable functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Which one of these functions is more readable - ``s()`` or
``std_dev()``? Why?

.. tab:: Python

   .. code:: python

      def s(p):
         a = 0
         for v in p:
            a += v
         m = a / len(p)
         d = 0
         for v in p:
            d += (v - m) * (v - m)
         return np.sqrt(d / (len(p) - 1))

      def std_dev(sample):
         sample_sum = 0
         for value in sample:
            sample_sum += value

         sample_mean = sample_sum / len(sample)

         sum_squared_devs = 0
         for value in sample:
            sum_squared_devs += (value - sample_mean) * (value - sample_mean)

         return np.sqrt(sum_squared_devs / (len(sample) - 1))

.. collapse:: Solution

   .. container::

      ``std_dev()`` is better because the function name and variable names
      have meaning, making it easier to understand what is going on at a
      brief glance. ``s()`` would require extensive documentation to make
      sense to an outside party (or your future self!).

Resources
~~~~~~~~~

This lesson is developed from the following resources: 

- http://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-gapminder/16-writing-functions/index.html
- https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/08-func/index.html

.. |fig 39_1| image:: /_static/images/python/functions/functions_39_1.png
   :align: middle

.. |fig 39_3| image:: /_static/images/python/functions/functions_39_3.png
   :align: middle

.. |fig 39_5| image:: /_static/images/python/functions/functions_39_5.png
   :align: middle 